1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2004
____________
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
____________
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
3. Constitution of National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions.
4. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson or other member.
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
6. Officers and other employees of Commission.
7. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants.
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.
9. Procedure to be regulated by Commission.
CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF A MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
10. Right to establish a Minority Educational Institution.
10A. Right of a Minority Educational Institution to seek affiliation.
CHAPTER IV
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF COMMISSION
11. Functions of Commission.
12. Powers of Commission.
12A. Appeal against orders of the Competent authority.
12B. Power of Commission to decide on the minority status of an educational institution.
12C. Power to cancel.
12D. Power of Commission to investigate matters relating to deprivation of educational rights of
minorities.
12E. Power of Commission to call for information, etc.
12F. Bar of jurisdiction.
13. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
14. Grants by Central Government.
15. Accounts and audit.
16. Annual report.
17. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament.
2
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
SECTIONS
18. [Omitted.]
19. Chairperson, Members, Secretary, employees, etc., of Commission to be public servants.
20. Directions by Central Government.
21. Protection of action taken in good faith.
22. Act to have overriding effect.
23. Returns or information.
24. Power to make rules.
25. Power to remove difficulties.
26. Repeal and saving.
THE SCHEDULE. [Omitted]

3
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2004
ACT NO. 2 OF 2005
[6th January, 2005.]
An Act to constitute a National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions and to provide
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the National Commission
for Minority Educational Institutions Act, 2004.
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1
***.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 11th day of November, 2004.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “affiliation” together with its grammatical variations, includes, in relation to a college,
recognition of such college by, association of such college with, and admission of such college to the
privileges of, a 2
*** University;
3
[(aa) “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) in relation to an educational institution recognised for conducting its programmes of
studies under any Act of Parliament, the Central Government; and
(ii) in relation to any other educational institution recognised for conducting its programmes
of studies under any State Act, a State Government in whose jurisdiction such institution is
established;]
4
* * * * *
(c) “Commission” means the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions
constituted under section 3;
3
[(ca) “Competent authority” means the authority appointed by the appropriate Government to
grant no objection certificate for the establishment of any educational institution of their choice by the
minorities;]
(d) “degree” means any such degree as may, with previous approval of the Central Government,
be specified in this behalf by the University Grants Commission, by notification in the Official
Gazette;
3
[(da) “educational rights to minorities” means the rights of minorities to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice;]
(e) “Member” means a member of the Commission and includes the Chairperson;
(f) “minority”, for the purpose of this Act, means a community notified as such by the Central
Government;
5
[(g) “Minority Educational Institution” means a college or an educational institution established
and administered by a minority or minorities;]
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) “qualification” means a degree or any other qualification awarded by a University;

1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31-10-
2019).
2. The word “Scheduled” omitted by Act 18 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
4. Cl. (b) omitted by Act 20 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f.1-9-2010).
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for cl. (g) (w.e.f. 1-9-2010).
4
1
* * * * *
(k) “technical education” has the meaning assigned to it in clause (g) of section 2 of the All India
Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987);
(l) “University” means a university defined under clause (f) of section 2 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), and includes an institution deemed to be a University under
section 3 of that Act, or an institution specifically empowered by an Act of Parliament to confer or
grant degrees.
CHAPTER II
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
3. Constitution of National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions.—(1) The Central
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the National
Commission for Minority Educational Institutions to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the
functions assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and 2
[three members] to be nominated by the
Central Government.
4. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson or other Member.—(1) A person shall not be
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson unless he,—
(a) is a member of a minority community; and
(b) has been a Judge of a High Court.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless he,—
(a) is a member of a minority community; and
(b) is a person of eminence, ability and integrity.
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.—(1) Every Member
shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he assumes office.
(2) A Member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign from the
office of Chairperson or, as the case maybe, of Member at any time.
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Member if that person—
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, involves moral turpitude;
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from three consecutive
meetings of the Commission; or
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused the position of Chairperson or
Member as to render that person's continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has been given an
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh nomination and a
person so nominated shall hold office for the unexpired period of the term for which his predecessor in
office would have held office if such vacancy had not arisen.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the
Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.

1. Cl. (j) omitted by Act 18 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 2010, s. 3, for “two members” (w.e.f. 1-9-2010).
5
6. Officers and other employees of Commission.—(1) The Central Government shall provide the
Commission with a Secretary and such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient
performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the
Secretary, officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
7. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants.—The salaries and allowances payable to the
Chairperson and Members and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions
payable to the Secretary, officers and other employees referred to in section 6, shall be paid out of the
grants referred to in sub-section (1) of section 14.
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.—No actor proceeding of the
commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy
or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
9. Procedure to be regulated by Commission.—(1) The Commission shall meet as and when
necessary at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any other
officer of the Commission duly authorized by the Secretary in this behalf.
1
[CHAPTER III
RIGHTS OF A MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
10. Right to establish a Minority Educational Institution.—2
[(1) Subject to the provisions
contained in any other law for the time being in force, any person, who desires to establish a Minority
Educational Institution may apply to the competent authority for the grant of no objection certificate for
the said purpose.]
(2) The Competent authority shall,—
(a) on perusal of documents, affidavits or other evidence, if any; and
(b) after giving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant,
decide every application filed under sub-section (1) as expeditiously as possible and grant or reject the
application, as the case may be:
Provided that where an application is rejected, the Competent authority shall communicate the same
to the applicant.
(3) Where within a period of ninety days from the receipt of the application under sub-section (1) for
the grant of no objection certificate,—
(a) the Competent authority does not grant such certificate; or
(b) where an application has been rejected and the same has not been communicated to the person
who has applied for the grant of such certificate,
it shall be deemed that the Competent authority has granted a no objection certificate to the applicant.
(4) The applicant shall, on the grant of a no objection certificate or where the Competent authority has
deemed to have granted the no objection certificate, be entitled to commence and proceed with the
establishment of a Minority Educational Institution in accordance with the rules and regulations, as the
case may be, laid down by or under any law for the time being in force.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “applicant” means any person who makes an application under sub-section (1) for
establishment of a Minority Educational Institution;

1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2006, s.3, for CHAPTER III (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 2010, s. 4, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1-9-2010).
6
(b) “no objection certificate” means a certificate stating therein, that the Competent authority has
no objection for the establishment of a Minority Educational Institution.
10A. Right of a Minority Educational Institution to seek affiliation.—(1) A Minority Educational
Institution may seek affiliation to any University of its choice subject to such affiliation being permissible
within the Act under which the said University is established.
(2) Any person who is authorised in this behalf by the Minority Educational Institution, may file an
application for affiliation under sub-section (1) to a University in the manner prescribed by the Statute,
Ordinance, rules or regulations, of the University:
Provided that such authorised person shall have right to know the status of such application after the
expiry of sixty days from the date of filing of such application.]
CHAPTER IV
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF COMMISSION
11. Functions of Commission.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the Commission shall—
(a) advise the Central Government or any State Government on any question relating to the
education of minorities that may be referred to it;
1
[(b) enquire, suo motu, or on a petition presented to it by any Minority Educational Institution, or
any person on its behalf into complaints regarding deprivation or violation of rights of minorities to
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice and any dispute relating to affiliation
to a University and report its finding to the appropriate Government for its implementation;
(c) intervene in any proceeding involving any deprivation or violation of the educational rights of
the minorities before a court with the leave of such court;
(d) review the safeguards provided by or under the Constitution, or any law for the time being in
force, for the protection of educational rights of the minorities and recommend measures for their
effective implementation;
(e) specify measures to promote and preserve the minority status and character of institutions of
their choice established by minorities;
(f) decide all questions relating to the status of any institution as a Minority Educational
Institution and declare its status as such;
(g) make recommendations to the appropriate Government for the effective, implementation of
programmes and schemes relating to the Minority Educational Institutions; and
(h) do such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment
of all or any of the objects of the Commission.]
12. Powers of Commission.—(1) If any dispute arises between a minority educational institution and
a 2
*** University relating to its affiliation to such University, the decision of the Commission thereon
shall be final.
(2) The Commission shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, have all the
powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of
1872), requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document from any
office;

1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2006, s. 4, for cls. (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
2. The word “Scheduled” omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
7
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
1
[(3) Every proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860) and the Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).]
2
[12A. Appeal against orders of the Competent authority.—(1) Any person aggrieved by the order
of refusal to grant no objection certificate under sub-section (2) of section 10 by the Competent authority
for establishing a Minority Educational Institution, may prefer an appeal against such order to the
Commission.
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within thirty days from the date of the order referred
to in sub-section (1) communicated to the applicant:
Provided that the Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty
days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.
(3) An appeal to the Commission shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the order against which the appeal has been filed.
(4) The Commission, after hearing the parties, shall pass an order as soon as may be practicable, and
give such directions as may be necessary or expedient to give effect to its orders or to prevent abuse of its
process or to secure the ends of justice.
(5) An order made by the Commission under sub-section (4) shall be executable by the Commission
as a decree of a civil court and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), so far as
may be, shall apply as they apply in respect of a decree of a civil court.
12B. Power of Commission to decide on the minority status of an educational institution.—(1)
Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992 (19 of
1992), where an authority established by the Central Government or any State Government, as the case
may be, for grant of minority status to any educational institution rejects the application for the grant of
such status, the aggrieved person may appeal against such order of the authority to the Commission.
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within thirty days from the date of the order
communicated to the applicant:
Provided that the Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty
days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.
(3) An appeal to the Commission shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the order against which the appeal has been filed.
(4) On receipt of the appeal under sub-section (3), the Commission may, after giving the parties to the
appeal an opportunity of being heard, 3
*** decide on the minority status of the educational institution and
shall proceed to give such direction as it may deem fit and, all such directions shall be binding on the
parties.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 12C, “authority” means any authority or
officer or commission which is established under any law for the time being in force or under any order of
the appropriate Government, for the purpose of granting a certificate of minority status to an educational
institution.
12C. Power to cancel.—The Commission may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard
to a Minority Educational Institution to which minority status has been granted by an authority or

1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2006, s.5 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
2. Ins. by s.6, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
3. The words “and in consultation with the State Government” omitted by Act 20 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-9-2010).
8
Commission, as the case may be, cancel such status under the following circumstances, namely:—
(a) if the constitution, aims and objects of the educational institution, which has enabled it to
obtain minority status has subsequently been amended in such a way that it no longer reflects the
purpose or character of a Minority Educational Institution;
(b) if, on verification of the records during the inspection or investigation, it is found that the
Minority Educational Institution has failed to admit students belonging to the minority community in
the institution as per rules and prescribed percentage governing admissions during any academic year.
12D. Power of Commission to investigate matters relating to deprivation of educational rights
of minorities.—(1) The Commission shall have the power to investigate into the complaints relating to
deprivation of the educational rights of minorities.
(2) The Commission may, for the purpose of conducting any investigation pertaining to a complaint
under this Act, utilise the services of any officer of the Central Government or any State Government with
the concurrence of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.
(3) For the purpose of investigation under sub-section (1), the officer whose services are utilised may,
subject to the direction and control of the Commission,—
(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any person and examine him;
(b) require the discovery and production of any document; and
(c) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any office.
(4) The officer whose services are utilised under sub-section (2) shall investigate into any matter
entrusted to it by the Commission and submit a report thereon to it within such period as may be specified
by the Commission in this behalf.
(5) The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness of the facts stated and the conclusion, if
any, arrived at in the report submitted to it under sub-section (4) and for this purpose the Commission
may make such further inquiry as it may think fit.
12E. Power of Commission to call for information, etc.—(1) The Commission, while enquiring
into the complaints of violation or deprivation of educational rights of minorities shall call for information
or report from the Central Government or any State Government or any other authority or organisation
subordinate thereto, within such time as may be specified by it:
Provided that,—
(a) if the information or report is not received within the time stipulated by the Commission, it
may proceed to inquire into the complaint;
(b) if, on receipt of information or report, the Commission is satisfied either that no further
inquiry is required, or that the required action has been initiated or taken by the concerned
Government or authority, it may not proceed with the complaint and inform the complainant
accordingly.
(2) Where the inquiry establishes violation or deprivation of the educational rights of the minorities
by a public servant, the Commission may recommend to the concerned Government or authority, the
initiation of disciplinary proceedings or such other action against the concerned person or persons as may
be deemed fit.
(3) The Commission shall send a copy of the inquiry report, together with its recommendations to the
concerned Government or authority and the concerned Government authority shall, within a period of one
month, or such further time as the Commission may allow, forward its comments on the report, including
the action taken, or proposed to be taken thereon, to the Commission.
(4) The Commission shall publish its inquiry report and the action taken or proposed to be taken by
the concerned Government or authority on the recommendations of the Commission.
12F. Bar of jurisdiction.—No court (except the Supreme Court and a High Court exercising
jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) shall entertain any suit, application or other
proceedings in respect of any order made under this Chapter.]
9
13. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.—The Chairperson shall exercise such
financial and administrative powers as may be vested in him by the rules made under this section:
Provided that the Chairperson shall have authority to delegate such of the financial and administrative
powers as he may think fit to any Member or Secretary or any other officer of the Commission subject to
the condition that such Member or Secretary or officer shall, while exercising such delegated powers,
continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of the Chairperson.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
14. Grants by Central Government.—(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money
as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may spend such sums of money as it thinks fit for performing the functions
under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in
sub-section (1).
15. Accounts and audit.—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such
intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in connection with the
audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of
the offices of the Commission.
16. Annual report.—The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
17. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament.—The Central Government shall
cause the annual report, together with a memorandum of action taken on the advice tendered by the
Commission under section 11 and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such advice, and the
audit report to be laid as soon as may be after they are received before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
18. [Power to amend Schedule.] Omitted by the National Commission for Minority Educational
Institutions (Amendment) Act, 2006 (18 of 2006), s. 7 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
19. Chairperson, Members, Secretary, employees, etc., of Commission to be public servants.—
The Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission shall be deemed
to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
20. Directions by Central Government.—(1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the
Commission shall be guided by such direction on questions of policy relating to national purposes, as may
be given to it by the Central Government.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Commission as to whether a
question is or is not a question of policy relating to national purposes, the decision of the Central
Government shall be final.
21. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall
lie against the Central Government, Commission, Chairperson, Members, Secretary or any officer or
other employee of the Commission for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under
this Act.
10
22. Act to have overriding effect.—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
23. Returns or information.—The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government such returns
or other information with respect to its activities as the Central Government may, from time to time,
require.
24. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of the service of,
the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (5) of section 5 and of the Secretary, officers and
other employees under sub-section (2) of section 6;
1
[(aa) the forms in which appeal under sub-section (3) of the section 12A and sub-section (3) of
section 12B shall be made;]
(b) the financial and administrative powers to be exercised by the Chairperson under section 13;
(c) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of
section 15;
(d) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under section 16;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
25. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for removing
the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each
House of Parliament.
26. Repeal and saving.—(1) The National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions
Ordinance, 2004 (Ord. 6 of 2004) is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or any action taken under the
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Act.
[THE SCHEDULE.] Omitted by the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions
(Amendment) Act, 2006 (18 of 2006), s.9 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).
________________

1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2006, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23-1-2006).