

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

CHAPTER II
AUTHORITIES TO BE APPOINTED OR CONSTITUTED UNDER THE ACT
3. Appointment of Director and other officers.
4. Appointment of Life Warden and other officers.
5. Power to delegate.
5A. Constitution of the National Board for Wild Life.
5B. Standing Committee of the National Board.
5C. Functions of the National Board.
6. Constitution of State Board for Wild Life.
6A. Standing Committee of Board.
7. Procedure to be followed by the Board.
8. Duties of State Board for Wild Life.
9. Prohibition of hunting.
10. [Omitted.].

CHAPTER III
HUNTING OF WILD ANIMALS
11. Hunting of wild animals to be permitted in certain cases.
12. Grant of permit for special purposes.
13. [Omitted.].
14. [Omitted.].
15. [Omitted.].
16. [Omitted.].
17. [Omitted.].

CHAPTER IIIA
PROTECTION OF SPECIFIED PLANTS
17A. Prohibition of picking, uprooting, etc. of specified plant.
17B. Grants of permit for special purposes.
17C. Cultivation of specified plants without licence prohibited.
17D. Dealing in specified plants without licence prohibited.
17E. Declaration of stock.
17F. Possession, etc., of plants by licensee.
17G. Purchase, etc., of specified plants.
17H. Plants to be Government property.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTED AREAS
Sanctuaries
18. Declaration of sanctuary.
18A. Protection to sanctuaries.
18B. Appointment of Collectors.
19. Collector to determine rights.
20. Bar of accrual of rights.
21. Proclamation by Collector.
22. Inquiry by Collector.
23. Powers of Collector.
24. Acquisition of rights.
25. Acquisition proceedings.
25A. Time-limit for completion of acquisition proceedings.
26. Delegation of Collector's powers.
26A. Declaration of area as sanctuary.
27. Restriction on entry in sanctuary.
28. Grant of permit.
29. Destruction, etc., in a sanctuary prohibited without a permit.
30. Causing fire prohibited.
31. Prohibition of entry into sanctuary with weapon.
32. Ban on use of injurious substances.
33. Control of sanctuaries.
33A. Immunisation of live-stock.
33B. Advisory Committee.
34. Registration of certain persons in possession of arms.
35. Declaration of National Parks.
36. [Omitted.].
National Parks
36A. Declaration and management of a conservation reserve.
36B. Conservation reserve management committee.
36C. Declaration and management of community reserve.
36D. Community reserve management committee.
37. [Omitted.].
Closed Area
Sanctuaries or National Parks declared by Central Government
38. Power of Central Government to declare areas as sanctuaries or National Parks or conservation reserves.

CHAPTER IVA
CENTRAL ZOO AUTHORITY AND RECOGNITION OF ZOOS
38A. Constitution of Central Zoo Authority.
38B. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and members, etc.
38C. Functions of the Authority.
38D. Procedure to be regulated by the Authority.
38E. Grants and loans to Authority and Constitution of Fund.
38F. Annual report.
38G. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament.
38H. Recognition of zoos.
38I. Acquisition of animals by a zoo.
38J. Prohibition of teasing, etc., in a zoo.
38K. Definitions.

CHAPTER IV B
NATIONAL TIGER CONSERVATION AUTHORITY
38L. Constitution of National Tiger Conservation Authority.
38M. Term of office and conditions of service of members.
38N. Officers and employees of Tiger Conservation Authority.
38-O. Powers and functions of Tiger Conservation Authority.
38P. Procedure to be regulated by Tiger Conservation Authority.
38Q. Grants and loans to Tiger Conservation Authority and Constitution of Fund.
38R. Accounts and audit of Tiger Conservation Authority.
38S. Annual report of Tiger Conservation Authority.
38T. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament.
38U. Constitution of Steering Committee.
38V. Tiger Conservation Plan.
38W. Alteration and de-notification of tiger reserves.
38X. Establishment of Tiger Conservation Foundation.
38XA. Provisions of Chapter to be in addition to provisions relating to sanctuaries and National Park

CHAPTER IV C
WILD LIFE CRIME CONTROL BUREAU
38Y. Constitution of Wild Life Crime Control Bureau.
38Z. Powers and functions of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau.

CHAPTER V
TRADE OR COMMERCE IN WILD ANIMALS, ANIMAL ARTICLES AND TROPHIES
39. Wild animals, etc., to be Government property.
40. Declarations.
40A. Immunity in certain cases.
41. Inquiry and preparation of inventories.
42. Certificate of ownership.
42A. Surrender of captive animals, animal article, etc
43. Regulation of transfer of animal, etc.
44. Dealings in trophy and animal articles without licence prohibited.
45. Suspension or cancellation of licences.
46. Purchase.
47. Maintenance of records.
48. Purchase of animals, etc., by licensee.
48A. Restriction on transportation of wild life.
49. Purchase of captive animal, etc., by a person other than a licensee.

CHAPTER VA
PROHIBITION OF TRADE OR COMMERCE IN TROPHIES, ANIMAL ARTICLES, ETC., DERIVED FROM CERTAIN ANIMALS
49A. Definitions.
49B. Prohibition of dealings in trophies, animal articles, etc., derived from scheduled animals.
49C. Declaration by dealers.

CHAPTER VB
REGULATION OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA AS PER CONVENTION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN ENDANGERED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA
49D. Definitions.
49E. Designation of Management Authority.
49F. Designation of Scientific Authority.
49G. Directions of Central Government.
49H. International trade in Scheduled specimen and restriction in respect thereof.
49-I Conditions for scheduled specimens.
49J. Conditions for import of scheduled specimens.
49K. Conditions for re-export of scheduled specimens.
49L. Conditions for introduction from sea of scheduled specimens.
49M. Possession transfer and breeding of living scheduled animal species.
49N. Application for Licence by breeders of Appendix I species.
49-O. Licence of breeders of Appendix I species.
49P. Prohibition on alteration, etc.
49Q. Species and scheduled specimens to be Government property.
49R. Application of provisions of Act in respect of species listed in Schedule I or II and Schedule IV.

CHAPTER VI
PREVENTION AND DETECTION OF OFFENCES
50. Power of entry, search, arrest and detention.
51. Penalties.
51A. Certain conditions to apply while granting bail.
52. Attempts and abetment.
53. Punishment for wrongful seizure.
54. Power to compound offences.
55. Cognizance of offences.
56. Operation of other laws not barred.
57. Presumption to be made in certain cases.
58. Offences by Companies.

CHAPTER VIA
FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY DERIVED FROM ILLEGAL HUNTING AND TRADE
58A. Application.
58B. Definitions.
58C. Prohibition of holding illegally acquired property.
58D. Competent authority.
58E. Identifying illegally acquired property.
58F. Seizure or freezing of illegally acquired property.
58G. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter.
58H. Notice of forfeiture of property.
58-I. Forfeiture of property in certain cases.
58J. Burden of proof.
58K. Fine in lieu of forfeiture.
58L. Procedure in relation to certain trust properties.
58M. Certain transfer to be null and void.
58N. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal.
58-O. Appeals.
58P. Notice or order not to be invalid for error in description.
58Q. Bar of Jurisdiction.
58R. Competent Authority and Appellate Tribunal to have powers of civil court.
58S. Information to competent authority.
58T. Certain officers to assist Administrator, competent authority and Appellate Tribunal.
58U. Power to take possession.
58V. Rectification of mistakes.
58W. Findings under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Chapter.
58X. Service of notices and orders.
58Y. Punishment for acquiring property in relating to which proceedings have been taken under this Chapter.
59. Officers to be public servants.

CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
60. Protection of action taken in good faith.
60A. Reward to persons.
60B. Reward by State Government.
61. Power to alter entries in Schedules.
62. Declaration of certain wild animals to be vermin.
62A. Regulation or prohibition of import, etc., of invasive alien species.
62B. Power to issue directions.
63. Power of Central Government to make rules.
64. Power of State Government to make rules.
65. Rights of Scheduled Tribes to be protected.
66. Repeal and savings.

SCHEDULE I
SCHEDULE II
SCHEDULE III
SCHEDULE IV

THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972
ACT NO. 53 OF 1972
[9th September, 1972.]

[An Act to provide for the [conservation, protection and management of wild life] and for matters connected therewith or ancillary or incidental thereto with a view to ensuring the ecological and environmental security of the country.]

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY

1. Short title, extent and commencement.(1) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force in a State or Union territory to which it extends on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act or for different States or Union territories.

2. Definitions. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(1) "animal" includes amphibians, birds, mammals and reptiles and their young, and also includes, in the cases of birds and reptiles, their eggs;
(2) "animal article" means an article made from any captive animal or wild animal, other than vermin, and includes an article or object in which the whole or any part of such animal [has been used, and ivory imported into India and an article made therefrom];
(4) "Board" means a State Board for Wild Life constituted under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(5) "captive animal" means any animal, specified in [Schedule I or Schedule II] which is captured or kept or bred in captivity;
(7) "Chief Wild Life Warden' means the person appointed as such under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4;
(7A) "circus" means an establishment, whether stationary or mobile, where animals are kept or used wholly or mainly for the purpose of performing tricks or manoeuvres;
(9) "Collector" means the chief officer in charge of the revenue administration of a district or any other officer not below the rank of a Deputy Collector as may be appointed by the State Government under section 18B in this behalf;
(10) "commencement of this Act", in relation to-
(a) a State, means commencement of this Act in that State,
(b) any provision of this Act, means the commencement of that provision In the concerned State:
(11) "dealer" in relation to any captive animal, animal article, trophy, uncured trophy, meat or specified plant, means a person, who carries on the business of buying or selling any such animal or article, and includes a person who undertakes business in any single transaction;
(12) "Director" means the person appointed as Director of Wild Life Preservation under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3;
(12A) "Forest officer" means the Forest officer appointed under clause (2) of section 2 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927) or under any other Act for the time being in force in a State;
(12B) "forest produce" shall have the same meaning as in sub-clause (b) of clause (4) of section 2 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927);
(14) "Government property" means any property referred to in section 39 [or section 17H];
(15) "habitat" includes land, water or vegetation which is the natural home of any wild animal [or specified plant];
(16) "hunting", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes,-
(a) killing or poisoning of any wild animal or captive animal and every attempt to do so;
(b) capturing, coursing, snaring, trapping, driving or baiting any wild or captive animal and every attempt to do so;
(c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of any such animal or, in the case of wild birds or reptiles, damaging the eggs of such birds or reptiles, or disturbing the eggs or nests of such birds or reptiles;
(16A) "invasive alien species" means a species of animal or plant which is not native to India and whose introduction or spread may threaten or adversely impact wild life or its habitat;
(17) "land" includes canals, creeks and other water channels, reservoirs, rivers, streams and lakes, whether artificial or natural, [marshes and wetlands and also includes boulders and rocks];
(18) "licence" means a licence granted under this Act;
(18A) "livestock" means farm animals and includes buffaloes, bulls, bullocks, camels, cows, donkeys, goats, sheep, horses, mules, yaks, pigs, ducks, geese, poultry and their young but does not include any animal specified in Schedules I, II and IV;
(19) "manufacturer" means a person who manufactures articles from any animal or plant specified in Schedules I, II and III, as the case may be;
(20) "meat" includes blood, bones, sinew, eggs, shell or carapace, fat and flesh with or without skin, whether raw or cooked, of any wild animal or captive animal, other than a vermin;
(20A) "National Board" means the National Board for Wild Life constituted under section 5A;
(21) "National Park" means an area declared, whether under section 35 or section 38, or deemed, under sub-section (3) of section 66, to be declared, as a National Park;
(22) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(23) "permit" means a permit granted under this Act or any rule made thereunder;
(24) "person" shall include any firm or company or any authority or association or body of individuals whether incorporated or not;
(24A) "protected area" means a National Park, a sanctuary, a conservation reserve or a community reserve notified under sections 18, 35, 36A and 36C of the Act;
(25) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(25A) "recognised zoo" means a zoo recognised under section 38H;
(25B) "reserve forest" means the forest declared to be reserved by the State Government under section 20 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927), or declared as such under any other State Act;
(26) "sanctuary" means an area declared as a sanctuary by notification under the provisions of Chapter IV of this Act and shall also include a deemed sanctuary under sub-section (4) of section 66;
(26A) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Act;
(27) "specified plant" means any plant specified in Schedule III;
(29) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator of that Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
(30) "taxidermy", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means the curing, preparation or preservation or mounting of trophies;
(30A) "territorial waters" shall have the same meaning as in section 3 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976);
(31) "trophy" means the whole or any part of any captive animal or wild animal, other than vermin, which has been kept or preserved by any means, whether artificial or natural, and includes-
(a) rugs, skins and specimens of such animal mounted in whole or in part through a process of taxidermy, and
(b) antler, bone, carapace, shell, horn, rhinoceros horn, hair, feather, nail, tooth, tusk, musk, eggs, nests and honeycomb;
(32) "uncured trophy" means the whole or any part of any captive animal or wild animal, other than vermin, which has not undergone a process of taxidermy, and includes a [freshly killed wild animal, ambergris, musk and other animal products];
(33) "vehicle" means any conveyance used for movement on land, water or air and includes buffalo, bull, bullock, camel, donkey, elephant, horse and mule;
(34) "vermin" means any wild animal notified under section 62;
(35) "weapon" includes ammunition, bows and arrows, explosives, firearms, hooks' knives, nets poison, snares and traps and any instrument or apparatus capable of anaesthetizing, decoying, destroying, injuring or killing an animal;
(36) "wild animal" means any animal specified in Schedule I or Schedule II and found wild in nature;
(37) "wild life" includes any animal, aquatic or land vegetation which forms part of any habitat;
(38) "Wild Life Warden" means the person appointed as such under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4;
(39) "zoo" means an establishment, whether stationary or mobile, where captive animals are kept for exhibiting to the public or ex-situ conservation and includes a circus and off-exhibit facilities such as rescue centres and conservation breeding centres, but does not include an establishment of a licensed dealer in captive animals.

CHAPTER II
AUTHORITIES TO BE APPOINTED OR CONSTITUTED UNDER THE ACT

3. Appointment of Director and other officers.(1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, appoint,-
(a) A Director of Wild Life Preservation;
(c) such other officers and employees as may be necessary.
(2) In the performance of his duties and exercise of his powers by or under this Act, the Director shall be subject to such general or special directions, as the Central Government may, from time to time, give.
(3) The officers and other employees appointed under this section shall be required to assist the Director.

4. Appointment of Life Warden and other officers.(1) The State Government May, for the purpose of this Act, appoint,-
(a) a Chief Wild Life Warden;
(b) Wild Life Wardens;
(bb) Honorary Wild Life Wardens;
(c) such other officers and employees as may be necessary.
(2) In the performance of his duties and exercise of his powers by or under this Act, the Chief Wild Life Warden shall be subject to such general or special directions, as the State Government may from time to time, give.
(3) The Wild Life Warden, the Honorary Wild Life Warden and other officers and employees appointed under this section shall be subordinate to the Chief Wild Life Warden.

5. Power to delegate.-(1) The Director may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by order in writing, delegate all or any of his powers and duties under this Act to any officer subordinate to him subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order.
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, with the previous approval of the State Government, by order in writing, delegate all or any of his powers and duties under this Act, except those under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 11, to any officer subordinate to him subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order.
(3) Subject to any general or special direction given or condition imposed by the Director or the Chief Wild Life Warden, any person, authorised by the Director or the Chief Wild Life Warden to exercise any powers, may exercise those powers in the same manner and to the same effect as if they had been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of delegation.

[...Text continues in next file...]